# CS360-WeightTrackerApp

## Briefly summarize the requirements and goals of the app you developed. What user needs was this app designed to address?
My goal was to create a weight tracking app for a prospective client that satisfied their user needs.  The application required a user database so users could create an account and login with their unique credentials. In the main display, I needed two databases to store the user's goal weight as well as their daily weight entries. These data needed to be visualized on the main screen and include all of the expected CRUD functions. Lastly, the client requested an opt-in SMS feature to notify users upon reaching their goal.

## What screens and features were necessary to support user needs and produce a user-centered UI for the app? How did your UI designs keep users in mind? Why were your designs successful?
The screens used for the app included the account creation/login screen, which is the default screen after initialization. It contained the standard username and password fields with clearly defined login and create account buttons. Successful login lead to the main display, which contained a personalized welcome message and the user's goal weight prominently at the top of the screen. Beneath this was the RecyclerView I used to show the values of the daily weight entry database. I used universal floating action buttons to ensure things weren't confusing for a user - a pencil for edit, an 'x' for deletion, and the '+' for adding new weights.

## How did you approach the process of coding your app? What techniques or strategies did you use? How could those techniques or strategies be applied in the future?
The scaffolding of developing the skeleton of the UI before applying logic to wire everything up was a great technique, in my opinion. From there, I did my best to break down my coding into modular components, so I could work through the user needs sequentially. I believe this is a sound organizational strategy, which admittedly I was better at theorizing than executing. In past courses, when learning about scrum/agile methodologies, I remember learning about strategies that are more or less the same, so I've no doubt they will be used in the future.

## How did you test to ensure your code was functional? Why is this process important, and what did it reveal?
I tested excessively and obsessively. I was paranoid that augmenting any code would cause a butterfly effect and break something that was already working as intended. It is important to test your application to the limits to ensure the integrity or even the security of the app. For example, when testing the SMS notifications, the SMS would work when I opted in.  When I disabled it in the Settings, it would no longer send notifications, so everything was alright there. However, when I re-enabled it from the Settings, it still wouldn't send goal notifications until the user relogged. This might not have been the end of the world for a weight tracker, but what if it were a financial app tracking stocks?? 

## Consider the full app design and development process from initial planning to finalization. Where did you have to innovate to overcome a challenge?
One of the features that required some critical thinking was the goal weight database. It was important that there only ever be a single goal weight.  Changing the goal weight entry would replace the existing entry, so the app wouldn't puzzle over which goal weight to compare with each daily weight entry. The SMS permissions were the most difficult to implement in my experience. After finally making sure all of the permissions and notifications were functioning...I realized I had hardcoded the emulator's phone number for the testing. I needed a more adaptable solution (especially so that my professor could grade the criteria). I opted for creating an additional screen called 'Settings' that allowed had a user save their phone number.

## In what specific component of your mobile app were you particularly successful in demonstrating your knowledge, skills, and experience?
For my first foray into Android Studio, I was honestly thrilled at how well the app was coming together. I wanted to do more, and I wanted it to look nicer, but the functions I implemented worked well. I am grateful for the experience, and honestly looking forward to continuing to dabble in Android Studio.
